docs(pbts): documentation for PBTS-related consensus parameters (#2376)
cometbft/cometbft: docs/explanation/core/proposer-based-timestamps.md

--- 
order: 14
---

# Proposer-Based Timestamp (PBTS)

This document overviews the Proposer-Based Timestamp (PBTS)
algorithm introduced in CometBFT version v1.0.
It outlines the core functionality of the algorithm and details the consensus
parameters that govern its operation.

## Overview 

The PBTS algorithm defines a way for a blockchain to create block

> timestamps that are within a reasonable bound of the clocks of the validators on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
timestamps that are within a reasonable bound of the validators' clocks on
```

the network. 

> It replaces the BFT Time algorithm for timestamp assignment, which computes the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It replaces the BFT Time algorithm for timestamp calculation and assignment, which computes the
```

> timestamp of a block using the timestamps included in precommit messages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
timestamp of a block using the timestamps aggregated from precommit messages.
```

* IBC packets can use either a [timestamp or a height to timeout packet
 delivery](https://ibc.cosmos.network/v8/ibc/light-clients/updates-and-misbehaviour?_highlight=time#checkformisbehaviour).

### Enabling PBTS

The PBTS algorithm is **not enabled by default** in CometBFT v1.0.

If a network upgrades to CometBFT v1.0, it will still use the BFT Time
algorithm until PBTS is enabled.
The same applies to new networks that do not change the default values for
consensus parameters in the genesis file.

Enabling PBTS requires configuring the [consensus parameters](#consensus-parameters)
that govern the operation of the algorithm.

### Selecting a Timestamp

When a validator creates a new block, it reads the time from its local clock
and uses this reading as the timestamp for the block.
The proposer of a block is thus free to select the block timestamp, but this

> timestamp have to be validated by other nodes in the network.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
timestamp has to be validated by other nodes in the network.
```

when instantiating a new network or when upgrading an existing a network that
uses BFT Time.

Consensus parameters are configured by the ABCI application and are the same
across all nodes in the network.

### `SynchronyParams.Precision`

The `Precision` parameter configures the acceptable upper-bound of clock drift
among all of the validators in the network.
Any two validators are expected to have clocks that differ by at most
`Precision` at any given instant.

Networks should choose a `Precision` that is large enough to represent the
worst-case for the clock drift among all participants.
Due to the [leap second events](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/7724),
it is recommended to use set `Precision` to at least `500ms`.

The `Precision` parameter is given in milliseconds.

### `SynchronyParams.MessageDelay`

The `MessageDelay` parameter configures the acceptable upper-bound for the
end-to-end delay for transmitting a `Proposal` message from the proposer to
_all_ validators in the network.

Networks should choose a `MessageDelay` that is large enough to represent the
worst-case delay for a message to reach all participants.

> This delay does not depend, a priori, on the size of proposed blocks, since it

Author: Addressed in [dcfec74](https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/pull/2376/commits/dcfec7479e185964bc319582b58d0c8658d38674)

`PbtsEnableHeight`), it is not possible to return to the legacy BFT Time algorithm.
The switch to PBTS is therefore irreversible.

Finally, if `PbtsEnableHeight` is set `1` in the genesis file or by the application
upon the ABCI `InitChain` method, the network will adopt PBTS from the first
height. This is the recommended setup for new chains.

The `PbtsEnableHeight` parameter is an integer.

## Important Notes

When configuring a network to adopt the PBTS algorithm, the follow steps must be considered:

1. Make sure that the clocks of validators are [synchronized](#clock-synchronization) **before** enabling PBTS.
1. Make sure that the configured value for [`SynchronyParams.Precision`](#synchronyparamsprecision) is
   reasonable.
1. Make sure that the configured value for [`SynchronyParams.MessageDelay`](#synchronyparamsmessagedelay) is
   reasonable and large enough to reflect the worst-case delay for messages in the network.
   Setting this parameter to a small value may impact the progress of the
   network, namely blocks may take very long to be committed.
1. Make sure that the block times **currently** produced by the network do not

>    differ too much from real time.

Reviewer 3: Could rephrase to mention that this is only relevant if the BFT time is in the future, wrt to real time.

Author: Added.

* IBC packets can use either a [timestamp or a height to timeout packet
 delivery](https://ibc.cosmos.network/v8/ibc/light-clients/updates-and-misbehaviour?_highlight=time#checkformisbehaviour).

### Enabling PBTS

The PBTS algorithm is **not enabled by default** in CometBFT v1.0.

If a network upgrades to CometBFT v1.0, it will still use the BFT Time
algorithm until PBTS is enabled.
The same applies to new networks that do not change the default values for
consensus parameters in the genesis file.

> Enabling PBTS requires configuring the [consensus parameters](#consensus-parameters)

Reviewer: Can you provide the exact field name here? (i.e., "PbtsEnableHeight")

Author: You have to set all of them, haven't you?

Reviewer: OK, I now see what you mean here.
Can you then just mention the three params at the end of this sentence, to make it more self-contained?

Author: Added.

that govern the operation of the algorithm.

### Selecting a Timestamp

When a validator creates a new block, it reads the time from its local clock
and uses this reading as the timestamp for the block.
The proposer of a block is thus free to select the block timestamp, but this

> timestamp has to be validated by other nodes in the network.

Author: All nodes validate it, only validators reject it. I can change to validators here, no problems.

### Validating Timestamps

When each validator on the network receives a proposed block, it performs a
series of checks to ensure that the block can be considered valid as a
candidate to be the next block in the chain.
If the block is considered invalid, the validator issues a `nil` prevote,
signaling to the rest of the network that the proposed block is not valid.

The PBTS algorithm performs a validity check on the timestamp of proposed
blocks. When a validator receives a proposal it ensures that the timestamp in
the proposal is within a bound of the validator's local clock.
For that it uses `Precision` and `MessageDelay` consensus parameters, 

>  which are the same across all nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which are the same across all nodes.
```

> Specifically, the algorithm checks that the timestamp is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifically, the algorithm checks that the proposed block's timestamp is
```

> no more than `Precision` greater than the node's local clock

Reviewer 2: I think this is backwards, no? Shouldn't it be no less than timestamp - precision, and no more than message delay + precision?

Author: The block timestamp cannot be in the future, that is, greater than the current clock time. We add precision because clocks are not perfectly synchronized.

So, receiveTime >= timestamp - precision, or timestamp <= receiveTime + precision..

Is this logic right?

(i.e., not in the future)
and no less than `MessageDelay + Precision` behind the node's local clock
(i.e., not too far in the past).
If the proposed block's timestamp is within the window of acceptable
timestamps, the timestamp is considered **timely**.
If the block timestamp is **not timely**, the validator rejects the block by
issuing a `nil` prevote.

> 

Reviewer: Should we add that this check is not performed if the proposed block has been locked?

Author: In this case, the proposed block is the same, but it is re-proposed in a different round. Also, this may be too much detail for a doc.

Author: Added this observation in https://github.com/cometbft/cometbft/pull/2376/commits/915fda848a656a7da36ca248f21cde10da03fae7

### Clock Synchronization

The PBTS algorithm requires the clocks of the validators in the network to be
within `Precision` of each other. In practice, this means that validators
should periodically synchronize their clocks to a reliable NTP server.
Validators whose clocks drift too far away from the rest of the network will no
longer propose blocks with valid timestamps. Additionally, they will not consider
the timestamps of blocks proposed by their peers to be valid either.

## Consensus Parameters

> The functionality of the PBTS algorithm is governed by two consensus
> parameters: the synchronous parameters `Precision` and `MessageDelay`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The functionality of the PBTS algorithm is governed by three consensus
parameters: the synchronous parameters `Precision` and `MessageDelay`, and `FeatureParams.PbtsEnableHeight`.
```

An additional consensus parameter `PbtsEnableHeight` is used to enable PBTS
when instantiating a new network or when upgrading an existing a network that
uses BFT Time.

Consensus parameters are configured through the genesis file, for new chains, or by the ABCI application, for new and existing chains, and are the same

> across all nodes in the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
across all nodes in the network for a given height.
```

Author: ```suggestion
across all nodes in the network at any given height.
```

### `SynchronyParams.Precision`

The `Precision` parameter configures the acceptable upper-bound of clock drift
among all of the validators in the network.
Any two validators are expected to have clocks that differ by at most
`Precision` at any given instant.

The `Precision` parameter is of [`time.Duration`](https://pkg.go.dev/time#Duration) type.

Networks should choose a `Precision` that is large enough to represent the
worst-case for the clock drift among all participants.
Due to the [leap second events](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/7724),

> it is recommended to use set `Precision` to at least `500ms`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it is recommended to set `Precision` to at least `500ms`.
```

### `SynchronyParams.MessageDelay`

The `MessageDelay` parameter configures the acceptable upper-bound for the
end-to-end delay for transmitting a `Proposal` message from the proposer to
_all_ validators in the network.

The `MessageDelay` parameter is of [`time.Duration`](https://pkg.go.dev/time#Duration) type.

Networks should choose a `MessageDelay` that is large enough to represent the
delay for a `Proposal` message to reach all participants.
As `Proposal` messages are fixed-size, this delay should not depend, a priori,
on the size of proposed blocks.

> But it does depend on the number of nodes in the network and latency of their
> connections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But it does depend on the number of nodes in the network, the latency of their
connections, and the level of congestion in the network.
```

### `FeatureParams.PbtsEnableHeight`

The `PbtsEnableHeight` parameter configures the first height at which the PBTS
algorithm should be adopted for generating and validating block timestamps in a network.

The `PbtsEnableHeight` parameter is an integer.

While `PbtsEnableHeight` is set to `0`, the network will adopt the legacy BFT
Time algorithm.

When `PbtsEnableHeight` is set to a height `H > 0`, the network will switch to

> the PBTS algorithm from height `H`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the PBTS algorithm from height `H` on.
```

The network will still adopt the legacy BFT Time algorithm to produce and
validate block timestamps until height `H - 1`.

> The enable height `H` must be a future height, i.e., larger than the current

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The enable height `H` must be a future height when it is set, i.e., larger than the current
```

blockchain height.

Once `PbtsEnableHeight` is set and the PBTS algorithm is enabled (i.e., from height
`PbtsEnableHeight`), it is not possible to return to the legacy BFT Time algorithm.
The switch to PBTS is therefore irreversible.

> Finally, if `PbtsEnableHeight` is set `1` in the genesis file or by the application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, if `PbtsEnableHeight` is set to `1` in the genesis file or by the application
```

> upon the ABCI `InitChain` method, the network will adopt PBTS from the first

Reviewer: ```suggestion
upon the ABCI `InitChain` method, the network will adopt PBTS from the initial
```

height. This is the recommended setup for new chains.

## Important Notes

> When configuring a network to adopt the PBTS algorithm, the follow steps must be considered:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When configuring a network to adopt the PBTS algorithm, the following steps must be considered:
```

> 1. Make sure that the clocks of validators are [synchronized](#clock-synchronization) **before** enabling PBTS.

Reviewer 2: Numbering here is messed up

Author: Why? This helps referring to a specific observation, as done in following paragraph.

   Setting this parameter to a small value may impact the progress of the
   network, namely blocks may take very long to be committed.
   - An approach to define this parameter is to observe the latency for
     fixed-size messages (e.g., `Vote` and `Proposal`) over time and define an
     empirical distribution of message delays.
     Then pick as value for the `MessageDelay` parameter, a high percentile of
     this distribution (e.g., the 99th or 99.9th percentiles).
1. Make sure that the block times **currently** produced by the network do not
   differ too much from real time.
   This is specially relevant when block times produced by BFT time are in the
   future, with respect to real time.

Observation 4. is important because, with the adoption of PBTS, block times are
expected to converge to values that bear resemblance to real time.
At the same time, the same property of monotonic block times guaranteed by BFT
Time is also ensured by PBTS.
This means that proposers using PBTS will **wait** until the time they read
from their local clocks becomes bigger than the time of the last committed
block before proposing a new block.

> As a result, if the time of the last block produced using BFT Time is far in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a result, if the time of the last block produced using BFT Time is too far in
```

the future, then the first block produced using PBTS will take very long to be
committed: the time it takes for the clock of the proposer to reach the time of

> the previously committed block.

Reviewer 2: This is a bit convoluted I would try to combine this

To prevent this from happening, first, follow recommendation 1., i.e., synchronize
the validators' clocks.
Then wait until the block times produced by BFT Time converge to values that do
not differ too much from real time (observation 4.).
This may take a long time, because in BFT Time if the value a validator reads
from its local clock is smaller than the time of the previous block, then the
time it sets to a new block will be the time of the previous block plus `1ms`.

> It may take a while, but blocks times eventually converge to real time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It may take a while, but block times will eventually converge to real time.
```
